	Mechanical Third Thumb

When's the last time you memorized a phone number? For many of us, we're 
already outsourcing parts of our brains to our devices. But imagine if the
 next gadget you bought wasn't a smartphone, but something to actually 
augment your body.

That's the premise of the Third Thumb, a new controllable prosthetic 
created by British product design student Dani Clode. The thumb is a 
controllable extra digit, complete with two motors and flexible hinges, 
giving the 3D-printed device the dynamic motion and range of a real thumb.

The best part is, no surgery is needed; the thumb comes as part of a rig 
that looks something like a fingerless glove made out of sleek plastic — 
albeit, with the extra thumb sticking out from the side.

The concept of extending the breadth of our grasp through the addition of 
an extra, controllable finger or thumb is certainly novel. But what's truly
notable about this new device is who it is for. While prosthetics are often
thought of only as devices for people with disabilities, the intent with 
this design is to extend its wearer's natural abilities — and that could be
anyone.


As Clode explains, she was inspired by the origin of the word prosthesis, 
which means to add or put onto, as opposed to the way we've come to think 
of prosthetic devices, which is often to fix or replace.

"The Third Thumb is inspired by this word origin, exploring human 
augmentation and aiming to reframe prosthetics as extensions of the body," 
she says.

"When we start to extend our abilities, and when we reframe prosthetics 
as extensions, then we start to shift the focus from 'fixing' disability
to extending ability."

With that comes the potential for a whole new field of elective prosthetics,
technology-driven devices designed for the human body that enhance our 
abilities.

And while the ability to upgrade our bodies sounds like something out of 
science fiction, in many ways, the precedent has already been set. Rob 
Spence is a documentary filmmaker who goes by the moniker Eyeborg. After 
losing his eye in an accident, he enlisted the help of engineers to help 
him create an embeddable a glass eye with a camera in it, giving him the 
ability to record interactions and conversations throughout his day. 

According to Spence, the idea of augmenting our bodies isn't an entirely 
new one. "The best example is breast augmentation. Here you have elective 
surgery that your great grandmother would think was unfathomable, but then 
it became a reproducible, affordable, safe, elective surgery that millions 
of people have decided to go under the knife for." And, he adds, "that's 
just to look good."


So, if you could have an extra opposable thumb, or better vision, or a 
neural lace (brain-computer interface), then sure, he says, "the writing 
is on the wall. It's already been done, and it's happening now."

Already, we take for granted things like hearing implants and pacemakers, 
technologies that we wear or implant to enhance our natural abilities. Even 
contact lenses and eyeglasses are technologies designed to restore us to 
optimal conditions.



Focus on optimal human functioning



What's unique about something like the Third Thumb is that it pushes us to 
consider what "optimal" human functioning really is, and with that, how we 
might become even more powerful through augmentation.

Of course, this brave new world doesn't come without concerns.


"I think the biggest concern is when the technology becomes stronger, 
faster, or more interesting than our biological bodies, and people start 
looking to actually replace parts of their bodies for better alternatives,
"cautions Clode. "There are a lot of ethical issues surrounding this, but 
it is their body and their choice."

Technology has always been aspirational. Even now, we use devices like 
smartphones to become better versions of ourselves, extending our mental 
capabilities by storing memories and finding information with greater 
efficiency than previously possible.

But with all new technologies, come new challenges, namely around access. 
Gadgets can be expensive, and cost can be prohibitive to fairly distributed 
access.

"As a starting point, I'd look at what has happened with computers and 
smartphones," says Spence, "I'd look at the lag that has happened with 
people who haven't had as much access."



Affordability and equality of access



With elective prosthetics, the digital divide that has traditionally 
separated those who can afford new technologies and those who can't, 
extends to how people are able to augment their brains or bodies. For 
instance, imagine what happens when wealthier kids can get legs that make 
them faster on the schoolyard, or a brain chip that helps them memorize 
algebra equations.

The ethical concerns around the potential growth of elective prosthetics 
are not so much the fear of the new abilities they promise; after all, our 
abilities have always evolved through time, to match our new technologies. 
Rather, they have to do with the equality of access and the speed by which 
change happens.

As Silicon Valley superpowers like Facebook and Elon Musks's Neuralink race 
to develop technologies to enhance and augment our brains, those concerns 
become more pressing than ever, even if those offerings are still in 
research and development stages.

"The ethical concern comes about because of the speed of change," says 
Spence.

Clode concurs, adding, "this reality is not far away and it's an important 
conversation we need to have."

The Third Thumb website calls the project a "starting base for a lot of 
future adaption of aesthetic," but mentions no plans to market the device.